# channel-estimation-and-detection-in-ofdm-systems

Wireless communication systems are a huge aspect of modern times, enabling high-speed data transmission, voice calls, multimedia streaming, and many more. At the heart of many of these operations lies Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing (OFDM), a highly efficient modulation scheme which divides the wideband channel into multiple narrow band subcarriers and transmits data over these subcarriers in different blocks, while ensuring orthogonality between the subcarriers. In OFDM, accurate channel estimation is important at the receiver to mitigate fading effects that can drastically reduce signal quality. In this project, I used various signal processing techniques to estimate the OFDM channel response and detect the transmitted data at the receiver.

A challenging aspect of OFDM channels is its time-varying and dynamic nature. It is non-stationary and susceptible to channel variations like multipath propagation and Doppler shifts. This calls for sophisticated signal processing techniques and optimum filters capable of handling non-stationary processes to decode the information at the receiver. The Kalman filter is an optimum filter that considers the available information, state, and model of the system to consistently update and enhance channel estimates, thereby adapting to changes in the wireless environment over time. This project adopted a per subcarrier Kalman filter-based approach to estimate the channel by using the pilot symbols.

The wireless channel was modelled using the Jake's model (a first-order autoregressive process). At the transmitter, the input data was generated using binary images with every pixel of the binary image represented by a 0 (black) or a 1 (white). The data consisted of an image of low noise quality and high noise quality. Quadrature Phase Shift Keying (QPSK) mapping was used for the data bits, and the QPSK symbol stream padded with zeros to make its size a multiple of the ODFM symbol length. Common pilot symbols were used for all the OFDM pilot indices. The cyclic prefixed sequence was then convolved with the channel vector to obtain the received signal.

The project was implemented using MATLAB. It involved several stages including data preprocessing phase, encompassing the removal of cyclic prefixing, conversion of the serial signal to parallel and Fast fourier transform (FFT). This was followed by the extraction of the pilot symbols. The model parameters were determined by using the Yule Walker equations. The pilot symbols and these parameters were then utilized to estimate the channel. Kalman filtering was then employed to derive the channel estimates, and the data was thereafter decoded. Furthermore, zero-padding was removed from the decoded data, and the data was eventually demodulated to recover the original signal. Additionaly, the decoded images were varied against the different levels of noisy data using the Bit Error Rate (BER). To achieve this, the BER was plotted against the corresponding linear noise variances. The project's outcomes, as demonstrated by the BER graph, clearly shows a notable relationship between increased noise levels and reduced data quality in the decoding process.
